[charts][docs] Revise the Charts Composition doc (#20032)
mui/mui-x: docs/data/charts/composition/composition.md

packageName: '@mui/x-charts'
---

# Charts - Composition

<p class="description">Learn how to use composition to build advanced custom Charts.</p>

> The MUI X Charts components follow an architecture based on context providers: you can pass your series and axes definitions to specialized components that transform the data and make it available to its children, which can then be composed.

Reviewer: Technically it's provided through context, so it's available to all descendants, not only its children. Not sure if we want to say that instead.

There are two main types of components used to create Charts: [structural](#structural-components) and [graphical](#graphical-components).

## Structural components

> Structural components are used to define a chart's structure and data.

Author: As a general rule I prefer to use complete sentences at the start of a paragraph - if you're skimming through and not paying attention to the headers then you won't know what "these" refers to.

> Structural components are used to define a chart's structure and data.

Author: Could rephrase it slightly to avoid saying "structural components are for the structure" 😅

```suggestion
Structural components are used to define a chart's dimensions, surfaces, and data.
```

- `ChartDataProvider` provides data to children components.

> - `ChartsSurface` renders the SVG elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ChartsSurface` renders the SVG element.
```

> - `ChartContainer` combines the Data Provider and Surface components, and is useful when you only need to customize graphical elements.

Reviewer: I believe the `ChartContainer` can also be used when you need to customize other elements. Its only benefit is that you can render one component instead of two.

Reviewer 2: I added a commit with details on wrapper and container @JCQuintas since your the main author of those components, I would be interested to get your feedback on those docs :)

:::info
Demos in this doc use the `ChartContainer` component.
For demos using `ChartDataProvider` and `ChartsSurface`, see [HTML components](/x/react-charts/components/#html-components).
:::

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need to keep a sentence to distinguish HTML element like legend and tooltip that needs to be in the data provider, but not in the surface, versus the svg elements that need to be in the surface

</ChartContainer>
```

## Graphical components

Graphical components are used to render the visual elements of a chart.

> They are children of [`ChartDataProvider`](#structural-components) described above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are descendants of [`ChartDataProvider`](#structural-components) described above.
```

`ChartContainer` is responsive by default: it automatically adjusts its dimensions to fit the available space defined by the parent element.

You can provide the `width` and `height` props to define the dimensions of a chart.

:::warning
For a chart to be responsive, its parent element must have intrinsic dimensions.
If the parent's dimensions rely on its content, the responsive chart will not render.
:::

The demo below lets you switch between a chart with discrete dimensions (`width={500} height={300}`) and one with no dimensions defined, so you can see how they differ.

{{"demo": "BasicComposition.js" }}

### Properties

`ChartContainer` takes all props that are not specific to a single graphical element.
This includes:

- The `xAxis` and `yAxis` props—see [Axis](/x/react-charts/axis/) for details
- The `colors` prop—see [Styling—Color palette](/x/react-charts/styling/#color-palette) for details
- The `series` and `dataset` props

#### Series

The `series` prop is an array of series definitions.
Learn more about each specific series type in their respective documents:

- [Line](/x/react-charts/lines/)
- [Bar](/x/react-charts/bars/)
- [Pie](/x/react-charts/pie/)

> - [Scatter](/x/react-charts/scatter/)

Reviewer: There are more series, such as heatmap, range bar, radar, etc. Do we want to list them here as well?

When using a [self-contained Chart component](/x/react-charts/quickstart/#self-contained-charts), it's assumed that the series type corresponds to the Chart type.
For example, `BarChart` assumes that `series` is of type `'bar'`:

```jsx
<BarChart
  series={[
    {
      // No need to specify the series type
      data: [1, 2, 3],
    },
  ]}
/>
```

When [composing a custom Chart](/x/react-charts/quickstart/#composable-charts), `ChartContainer` doesn't know the series type so you must explicitly define it.
For example, the custom Chart below uses both `BarPlot` and `LinePlot`, and each one requires a corresponding `type` for its `data`:

```jsx
<ChartContainer
  series={[
    // This series is for the bar plot
    { data: [1, 2, 3], type: 'bar' },
    // This series is for the line plot
    { data: [3, 2, 1], type: 'line' },
  ]}
>

>   <BarPlot /> {/* Only display the series with type: 'bar' */}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <BarPlot /> {/* Only displays the series with type: 'bar' */}
```

## Subcomponents

:::info
The CSS `z-index` property does not exist on SVG elements, so the order of SVG elements in the composed component is the only way to define how they overlap.

> Elements rendered later will overlap on top of elements rendered earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elements rendered later display above elements rendered earlier.
```

```

The following demo lets you toggle clipping for scatter and line plots.
Observe how the line markers extend beyond the clip area, rendering on top of the axes.

{{"demo": "LimitOverflow.js" }}

:::warning
The demo above generates a unique ID with `useId()`.

```js
const id = useId();
const clipPathId = `${id}-clip-path`;
```

It's important to generate unique IDs for clip paths, especially when dealing with multiple charts on a page.
Assigning a static ID like `"my-id"` will lead to conflicts.
:::

### Axis

To add axes, use `ChartsXAxis` and `ChartsYAxis` as described in [Axis—Composition](/x/react-charts/axis/#composition).
These components take an `axisId` prop that indicates which axis defined in the container should be rendered.
If `axisId` is not provided, the first axis is used by default.

### Grid

Use `ChartsGrid` to add a grid to the component.
See [Axis—Grid](/x/react-charts/axis/#grid) for more information.

### Legend

> Use `ChartsLegend` to add a legend to the component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `ChartsLegend` to display a legend with information about the chart.
```
